Puccini's "Tosca" includes a number of surefire arias, and you can hear them sung vividly and well in the San Francisco Opera's revival, which opened the company's summer season at the War Memorial Opera House on Tuesday night.

The rest of the opera, unfortunately, is something of a hit-or-miss undertaking.

The blood-and-thunder tale of two idealistic but naive artists caught up in the repressive political machinery of Rome during the Napoleonic wars, "Tosca" comes around like clockwork in San Francisco (as it does to most opera companies). It always thrills the sensibilities of those discovering the piece for the first time, but for more experienced hands, it needs a more expertly delivered performance than the company provided to really work its magic.

Where Tuesday's performance fared best was in the big, famous solo numbers. In the title role, soprano Adrianne Pieczonka outdid herself with a gripping, fine-tuned account of "Vissi d'arte," Tosca's heartfelt aria of aestheticism and self-pity.

Tenor Carlo Ventre, as her painterly beau Cavaradossi, went some way to redeeming an otherwise unimpressive performance with a ravishing account of the third-act showpiece "E lucevan le stelle." And baritone Lado Ataneli, making his company debut as the villainous police chief Scarpia, proved a fierce dramatic presence at the beginning of Act 2, where he justifies - to himself and the world - the amoral path he has chosen.

To a certain extent, this sort of prioritizing is a canny move on an artist's part: If there's one thing you want to sing well, it's the show-stopper that the audience has been looking forward to all evening. But it doesn't help much when those high points stand out amid generally so-so proceedings.

And this "Tosca" needs help from all quarters to create a vivid musical and theatrical universe.

The production, designed in 1997 by Thierry Bosquet in imitation of the one that held sway in San Francisco for decades (including the 1932 opening of the War Memorial), wears its antiquarianism proudly. It's a handsome but heavily upholstered affair, and not even the dexterous stage touches of director Jose Maria Condemi could always keep off the dusty feel of the museum.

Conductor Marco Armiliato - usually a reliable force for swift, ebullient tempos - paced the performance with wonderful fluidity but with an uncharacteristic tendency toward overemphasis. The Act 1 Te Deum, in particular, missed some of the implacable forward motion that should speak of Scarpia's tyrannical machinery getting into gear.

Pieczonka, a Canadian singer making her company debut, boasts plenty of tonal muscle, and she deployed it assuredly in the role's more demanding passages. But aside from the sudden emotional translucency of her "Vissi d'arte," the performance was often dramatically blunt.

Ventre's dry tone and laborious upper register (especially in the opening "Recondita armonia" aria) impeded the effect of what might have been an ardent portrayal. Ataneli brought suavity and vigor to his role without ever commanding the stage as a Scarpia should.

The smaller roles, at any rate, were capably handled. Bass Jordan Bisch put in a forceful debut as Angelotti, and the redoubtable bass-baritone Dale Travis made an enjoyable Sacristan in the mode of Danny Kaye. Joel Sorensen was a sonorous Spoletta and the Adler Fellows were well represented by Austin Kness as Sciarrone and Kenneth Kellogg as the Jailer.



Read more: http://www.sfgate.com/cgi-bin/article.cgi?f=/c/a/2009/06/04/DD7V1806SV.DTL&type=performance#ixzz113BLDFJL